This video is brought to you by Squarespace check out Squarespace at
squarespace.com/biographics. You get 10% off your first purchase,
more on them in a bit.
They say the greed is the downfall of man.
It certainly was the downfall of one particular man,
despite having all the power and of them on the, in the world,
it was still not enough for Marcus Luin crashes.
He could have spent the rest of his life as one of Rome's most influential
citizens getting rich and fat off the countless properties and businesses that
he owns.
But instead he marched to his doom out of greed and hubris and caused not only
his own demise,
but embroiled Rome in conflict that would last over 250 years.
Marcus CIN Craus was born CIR 115 BC into an old and
respected Roman family named Luin.
He was the second of three sons of Publius lass crisises, and VE Le.
His father is successful, man. He served as a Senator then console,
then cen then even had a Roman triumph that his honor,
which was a public ceremony intended to celebrate a big military victory.
Despite all of this, they lived modestly Pluto,
dark who gives the most detailed account Ofra as his life.
And the parallel lives said that the future general grew up in a small house and
that both his brother got married while their parents were still alive.
And they all lived under the same roof and ate at the same table.
One of CRA's brothers died in the early eighties,
BC and left behind a childless widow named Tatu. Although unusual for that time,
crass decided to marry her and they had two boys together,
Marcus and Publius his older brother also died for you years later,
which means that he received the full inheritance from his parents,
which was substantial despite their meager living conditions.
So just how substantial. Well,
of course it's hard to provide an accurate measurement of his wealth,
but Pluto talk said that when KRA has started out, he had around 300 talents,
which is great. I mean, but how much is their talent in today's?
My that's actually surprisingly difficult to answer since the value of the
talent was tied to the value of silver and has varied wildly over the course of
the centuries that it was in use. Originally,
the talent was simply a unit of weight first introduced in ancient Mesopotamia
and used by everyone, the Acadians, the Sumerians IANS, the IANS, the Egyptians,
the Hebrews, the talent,
the Pluto art is referring to is the attic or Greek talent.
It was still a unit of weight which measured around 26 kilograms,
but it became far more commonly used as a unit of currency,
which represented the weight of a talent in pure silver.
So then how much was an at talent worth? Fortunately,
others have already made some calculations.
So we don't have to the English trends of Pluto book dated to 1916,
estimated that one talent was worth around $1,200 or around $29,000
in today's money.
Another estimate was provided in 1885 by William Watson Goodwin who taught Greek
studies that Harvard and recalculated that one talent was around a thousand
dollars or $27,500 in modern currency.
So both estimates were in the same ballpark. Now going back to Pluto, a,
he said that CRAs has started out with 300 talents,
which would be around $8.6 million today.
And by the time he left for the path in expedition, where he died,
crashes was worth around 7,100 talents, which would be over 200 million today.
Of course, this is just a rough estimate.
As some places is wealth in the billions and whether or not he truly was the
richest man in Rome is again,
something that is difficult for us to establish with any certainty
Crisis is, is through the ranks of Rome,
came during a time of Turmo for the Republic.
One that perhaps foreshadowed its eventual collapse just a few decades later.
The main cause for this turmoil was a rivalry between two men,
solar and GAAS Mars who were both highly decorated military commanders,
but fierce opponents in 88, BC solar,
who was a cons at the time was getting ready to take his me in March Easter to
fight the kingdom of Ponti in modern day, Turkey led by king myth Rodda the six,
however,
GU Marus also wanted that position and to use his influence and intrigues to
relieve solar of his duty, but he did not anticipate his opponents next move.
Instead of relinquishing commands, solar took his troops and marched on Rome.
The same as Julius Caesar would do. 40 years later,
this became known as so's first civil war and the general garner the distinction
of being the first man to seize power of the Roman Republic through forced gas,
Mars, and his cohorts. However, managed to flee the city and retreat to Africa,
where they regrouped back in Rome,
solar consolidated his power enacted new policies,
placed to supporters in high ranking officer then traveled to pons to find king
with dart as originally intended.
This provided GAAS Marus with the time he needed to raise an army.
So the following year he entered Roman successfully ousted solar supporters,
raising all the changes enacted by his enemy.
The con was a lot bloodier as it was followed by the Mar and purges
where Marus and his allies are assassinated. A lot of. So supporters,
this included Luci Luin CRAs older brother of Marcus CRAs,
and presumably also his father who died around the same time.
Although weren't unsure of the exact circumstances,
it's possible that publi lyin CRA has committed suicide.
Knowing that a far worse fate was awaiting him with the Senator,
his mercy marrys organized elections for consuls,
but only two people were allowed to take part himself.
And his second in commands, Lucius Cornelius, sinner, unsurprisingly,
they became the new consoles. Once he fulfilled all of his goals,
Gais Marus died just a few days later and sinner took over eager to avoid the
same pages.
His father and brother crass fled Roman traveled to his Spania to meet some of
his father's friends.
He spent the next few years there living in a cave near the sea making
arrangements, building an army,
knowing that another battle between the two sides was inevitable. However,
Senator would not take part in 84 BC.
He thought he would launch a surprise attack on his enemies by crossing the AIC
sea into D Maia.
Although the circumstances are a bit murky sinner angered his own soldier
somehow, and he was killed in IM mutiny.
The leadership of his faction was passed on others,
such as GAAS Marus the younger and a cons named carbo.
It was an 83 BC that solar launched his second defensive on Rome predictably
named solar's second civil war. He was joined by crass,
but also by PO pay who was up and coming general at the time,
the decisive moments in the war came at the battle of Colleen gates in November
of 82 BC, where Marcus crass played a pivotal role.
He was in charge of the right wing.
And while solar's troops were getting pushed back into the center,
crass was victorious on his side and completely routed their enemies once.
So was in charge of Rome. Again,
he declared him so of dictator and spent the next couple of years hunting down
the remaining members of the Marion faction. At the same time,
he was also very generous when it came to rewarding,
his supporters and Marcus crass was at the top of the list.
This was the beginning of CRA's path to Exor Orent wealth.
He lost everything when he fled Rome because his enemies enacted prescriptions
and confiscated all of his families property.
But now the same thing was happening to the Marion supporters.
Solar took everything they owned, which was now being sold off for peanuts.
Andras was the main buyer letting his greed completely take over or his Pluto
tar put it.
The many virtues of CRA were obscured by his so vice of AEST and it is likely
sort of the one vice which became stronger than all the others in him weakens
the rest.
The historian makes mention of one case in Bri where CRAs has prescribed a
wealthy man without solar's permission,
just so that he could buy his estate at auction.
Another even more scandalous episode occurred when crass was accused of erupting
a vest,
Virgin names like Sinnia when in fact he kept visiting her because he wanted to
buy her Villa, but this was not enough for crisis.
Once there was no more confiscated property to purchase.
He moved on delict and destroyed buildings that had been damaged after years of
fighting. He also bought hundreds of slaves who were skilled laborers,
particularly builders and architects. So he purchased Ru buildings for,
to nothing repaired or rebuilt them using slave labor and then sold them off for
a large profit.
Next up crisises realized that many houses were damaged by fires in Rome almost
every day. So he established his own private fire department.
Of course they did not perform this service outta the goodness of their hearts.
No, if a person's house caught on fire brigade would rush over there,
but then they would just sit back and relax you to watch the fire burn.
The whole thing down that was when crashes showed up,
ready to make an offer to buy the property while it still had some little value.
If the person accepted, then the brigade put out the fire. If they didn't,
then the house burned down to ashes and crashes made a new offer.
This time much lower than the previous one, one way or another. You know,
my stories came out on top in addition to is ever growing real estate empire CRA
has also derived his massive wealth from other sources, such as slaves,
silver mines, and the lambs used for agriculture, despite all his actions,
Pluto, tar did not consider CRAs as an unpleasant man. Quite the contrary.
In fact,
the historians said the wealthy Roman won everyone over with universal kindness,
dignity of person, persuasiveness of speech and winning grace of feature.
Despite his obsession with making money, crass was never loathed to spend it.
And he was generous with strangers and kept his house open to all.
He was an esteemed and careful man and one who was ready with his help.
He pleased people also by the kindly and unaffected manner with which
he classed their hands and dressed them free,
never met a Roman so obscure and so lowly that he did not return his greeting
and call him by name. But wealth alone was not enough for a Roman of note.
He also needed status and influence. So to gain these crashes had two choices,
politics, or the military.
He chose the former because he was better suited for it.
And it would've been undoubtedly aided by his wealth and his lineage. Meanwhile,
being a successful military commander,
would've meant being away from Rome for long periods of time,
which would've adversely affected his businesses.
Unsurprisingly crashes turned out to be enable politician and skilled a terror.
He pursued the curses.
Honorum AKA a tradition of sequence of public officers held by senators as they
steadily climbed the political ladder.
He was described as making very many changes in his political views and was
neither a steadfast friends nor an implacable enemy,
but readily abandoned both his favors and his resentments that the dictates of
his interests. So that frequently within a short space of time,
the same men and the same measures found in him,
both an advocate and an opponent throughout his life.
It did seem to bother crass that he never achieved the same kind of military
glory. Some of his colleagues,
he had a particular chip on his shoulder about Pompe who went away to fight into
mass Victor victories while crass was building his real estate, em empire,
despite his young age, he was already being Pompe. The great and Pluto,
a related one incident. When somebody announced the arrival of Pompe,
the great and crass fell to the floor, laughing asking how great is he?
But in 73,
BC Marcus crass was granted the opportunity to gain some prestige for himself as
he was tasked with putting down a rebellion started by an escaped slave named
spar. And just before we could continue with the rest of this video,
let me give a quick word to today's fantastic sponsor Squarespace.
Now more than ever,
people are getting creative with their time reaching into their savings
accounts, to start a new business or a new website,
maybe a blog of some kinds. And with Squarespace, the world really is yours.
It's the perfect tool to help you fashion a website into whatever you want it to
be. If you're looking to get in and out quick,
without thinking too much about what your website should look like. Well,
bam use one of Squarespace's beautiful templates and make a website that looks
as if it was made just for you, but is actually just a beautiful template.
Or maybe you're more of a hands on person. You've got design chops,
and you wanna make something that looks exactly how you have it in your mind.
Well, of course, with square, it's got all the customization options you need.
And also there's no updates, no patches, no tactical nonsense to worry about.
Once you're done setting up your website, tinkering with the design,
if you're so inclined or maybe just playing with the colors.
There's loads of features that Squarespace provides your website can thrive.
eMarket paints, patronage, portals, social integrations, Memor, any areas,
analytics, commercial options, 24 7 customer support.
Everything need is in one place.
So when you're ready to get started on the next web project of yours,
big or small, if it involves a website, probably will,
it's gotta be with Squarespace right now.
You can go to squarespace.com for a free trial. And when you're ready to launch,
go to Squarespace,
do and forward slash biographics and you'll save 10% of your first purchase of a
website or a domain. And let's get back to the video.
A lot of you are probably already familiar with sparas if you are not.
Or if you simply want to learn about his rebellion in more detail,
we actually already did a biographics video all about sparas,
which you should check out after you watch this video.
If you haven't seen it already. Here is the cliff notes version though.
Sparas and a bunch of other slaves escaped from a gladiator school and Kaur in
73 BC and started raid the Italian countryside.
Such revolts were not unheard of. In fact,
the war of sparas is also known as the third war.
Part of a series of conflicts caused by slave uprisings.
That is why the Roman Senate did not really show much concern at first only
sending militia and local patrols after sparas.
And assuming that they would be enough to put down the rebellion,
none of them could get the job done. However,
they were defeated by the slaves whose numbers kept growing as more and more
people joined their cause even properly trained.
Roman legions led by consoles were bested by the rebels. And well,
the Senate started to panic.
That is when they gave the task of defeating sparas to Marcus crass.
Also making him a prey to and giving him commands of eight legions.
This was something that crass needed in order to advance his career and to
achieve it. He showed a degree of ruthlessness.
He never really displayed before.
This was exemplified after an incident with his legate Maus,
who was given commands of two legions and told to follow sparas and Hisar
without engaging them in combat mumus.
However thought that he had the upper hands.
So he attacked the rebels and lost to punish him.
Crass revived the practice of decimation.
He took the 500 soldiers who were the first to retreat,
divided them into groups of 10 and made them draw lots with one man being
executed from each group, despite the Rocky star crash,
as soon had the advantage he had trapped sparas and his army and brought him and
had ditches and walls erected to prevent the enemy from running away.
His plan was to,
with his opponents down through attrition and leave them vomit for one final
attack. However, he soon received terrible news.
The Senate was sending him reinforcement. Now this might sound like good news,
but it wasn't because POM bay was the one leading those reinforcements crass
knew that the only reason they chose him in the first place was because Pompe
was busy putting down a revolt in a Spania, but he had been successful.
And now he was heading this way.
Andras realized that if the gladiator rebellion ended, when Pompe arrived,
he would be the one receiving all the glory. Unfortunately, for crashes.
That is exactly what happened. He met sparas in one decisive action,
known as the battle of so Laris river, despite sustaining significant losses,
the Roman was triumphant sparas was killed in the battle as were tens of
thousands of his soldiers.
Thousands more were taken prisoner and later crucified along the Appian way on
crass orders, but around 5,000 or store managed to plea the battle,
they ran into Pompe army and were cut down without hesitation.
But this allowed Pompe to write to the Senate saying that crass had conquered
the slaves, but he himself had extubated the war for his efforts,
not just against sparas,
but also in Hispania Pompe was awarded a major triumph upon his return to Rome,
grass, as meanwhile did not object, as he knew, it'd make him seem petty.
And I ignorable instead what he did was ask Pompe for help despite his young age
and an experience when it came to public office,
Pompe had been asked to stand for consul ship was the highest position of the
curus. Honorum typically two consoles were elected to serve a one year term.
So crass asked Pompe to endorse him as the other candidates,
which Pompe did because he thought it would be useful to have crasser a favor.
So the two became consoles together in 70 BBC.
Although Pluto are specified that their terms ended without anything of
significance happening because each one tried to undo the measures of the other.
Although the relationship between crass and Pompe was never openly hostile off,
it was contentious since the two of them usually had the same ambitions,
but a third element was introduced into the equation, which changed the dynamic.
And that hell was Julia Caesar.
Caesar was another prominent citizen of Rome who was climbing the ranks and saw
the potential for a powerful Alliance.
IFRA and Pompe were able to put aside their differences. At first,
CES was actually the junior in the partnership.
Pompe was Rome's most celebrated.
Military commander while KRAS was the city's most influential land owner.
And both were more powerful than him Caesar that didn't not want a risk making
an enemy out of one of them by fully supporting the other.
So instead he persuaded them that it would be in all their best interests if
they worked together against other prominent statesmen, such as Carto and Ciro,
who opposed them all, that is how the first Traver was born around 60 BC.
In the words of Livy,
it was a conspiracy against the state by three leading citizens.
They did not share an agenda,
but they sought to help each other out so that they could bypass the Senate in
order to accomplish their goals.
Pluto a said that Rome was divided into three powerful parties that have Pompe
that have Caesar and that have CRAs.
It was the thoughtful and conservative part of the city,
which attached itself to Pompe the violence and volatile apart,
which supported the hopes of Caesar while crass took a middle ground and drew
from both Caesar was the one who most benefited from this traverse with the
support of his allies.
He was elected console and was granted in army and then went off to fight the
go. After a few years,
his military success made Caesar very popular and influential.
And his two co-conspirators started feeling like they were getting the short end
of the stick.
Although they faced heavy resistance from their enemies in the Senate in 56,
BC Pompe and Marcus crash has secured another cons ship for themselves.
And afterwards were assigned governorships of Roman provinces Pompe received two
provinces inania while CRAs received Syria.
The exact circumstances behind this political move are uncertain.
Some historians claimed that Caesar helps them become consoles again in attempt
to preserve their waning Alliance.
While others said that crass and Pompe did this without Caesar's approval
specifically to counter his growing influence
Back then being made a governor of a province meant that you had car Blan to do
whatever you wanted. More or less, that was receive bribe, take loans,
start new businesses, et cetera.
It was usually regarded as a reward from the Senate to make yourself as rich as
possible while you served as governor.
This should have been an ideal position for crashes, but he wanted more,
not satisfied with the richest found in Syria.
He thought about expanding to the east into the Perian empire.
The two nations had a complicated and violent relationship for most of the 500
year existence of the Perian M empire founded in the mid third century.
BC pario was an Iranian civilization,
but became a powerhouse in the middle east when it defeated the saluted em
empire, it took over all of their T and just kept expanding.
The problem with expansion is that eventually you run into other people who
would prefer to stop your expansion. That's what happens to Paia.
It expanded Westwood until it reached Roman territory, even.
So for about 200 years,
the two sides coexisted using the kingdom of Armenia as a useful buffer between
their lands. This changed in 54 BBC. However,
when the first of a series of conflicts known as the Roman Pathan wars began
after Crassus decided to Rick his military career,
nobody knows what brought this on crass was over 60 years old and he had not
taken part in a military campaign for almost 20 years since he fought sparas.
Was it Mely his greed that spurred him on?
Or was it also his design not to be out shines by Pompe Caesar?
According to Pluto, a in private CRAs has made youthful boasts,
which ill become his years saying that he will go beyond Patha into India
and bacteria and make Pompeo's campaigns against Mr.
Roddas look like child's played.
So it definitely seems like he was motivated by more than just money as a
governor crass had the power to levion army. So in 53 BC,
even without senates approval, he invaded Mesopotamia.
At first things went quite well for the Roman commander.
Most cities offer a tribute Andi themselves with the Romans willingly,
particularly the Greek cities that had been founded by the Macedonians during
the time of Alexander. One exception was a city called Zen doin,
which arrested and killed some of crashes as soldiers.
So I wouldn't return crash as PL it and enslaved all of its citizens.
The Roman general made his first mistake when winter came,
because instead of pressing the attack,
he retreated to Syria until spring waiting for his son Publius to arrive with
reinforcement. By this point, of course,
the IANS received word of his incursions,
and this gave them time to prepare even sent an NVO Toras this from king or OES,
the seconds of par giving him one last chance to stop his invasion.
Boastfully Crassus reply that he would give the king his response in Salus,
meaning that he planned to take the path, the end capital to this.
The ENVO burst out in laughter and pointing at his Palm said, oh,
crasus hair will grow there before thou shall see sous.
The second mistake came when he refused the aid of king.
Arva the second of Armenia who offered CRA a safe passage and reinforcement.
If he invaded Paia through his land,
instead crass that accepted the help of AAM knee leader of the kingdom of oone
and crossed the Aras into Mepo AAM knee had served inpe the past and proved
himself a friend of Rome. But on this occasion,
he was working with the Parsons and led crashes and troops into the open desert,
completely weakened, tired, and demoralized.
The Roman troops port the Parsons at the battle of Kaha in 53 BC located in
modern day Harran Turkey.
The Persians led by a general named Serena slaughtered.
The Romans even they were severely outnumbered.
Crass had clearly lost the battle. His son Publius had been killed,
and most of his remaining men were getting ready to mu him.
He tried making a truce,
but this was a trap and Marcus crashes and his entire revenue were killed when
they met the Patian. According to Pluto,
art crashes as killer was a man named PO max threes.
He then cut off his heads and one hand and sent them to the Pathan king,
much more notorious death was told by Cassius Dio,
who said that crass had Moten gold pulled down his throat to punish him prison.
And in greed, although he didn't specify if the Roman general was alive or dead,
when this happened back home, his death, that important in consequences,
the starters, it was a humiliating defeat for Rome.
One that had to be answered for.
So Patha became one of its fierce enemies for the next 250 years,
but crass as demise also meant the end of the first Tru its Pompe and Caesar
were already on hostile terms by this point. And with crass has gone,
the two of them were firmly placed on a collision course,
which prompted the fall of the Republic and gave rise to the Roman empire.
So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up button below. Don't forget to subscribe.
Also thank you to Squarespace for sponsoring it.
There's a link to them below and thank you for watching.